.\"
.\" This file is part of the Detox package.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) Doug Harple <detox.dharple@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" For the full copyright and license information, please view the LICENSE
.\" file that was distributed with this source code.
.\"
.Dd March 31, 2024
.Dt DETOX 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm detox
.Nd clean up filenames
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl f Pa configfile
.Op Fl n | -dry-run
.Op Fl r
.Op Fl s Ar sequence
.Op Fl -special
.Op Fl v
.Ar
.Nm
.Op Fl L
.Op Fl f Pa configfile
.Op Fl v
.Nm
.Op Fl h | -help
.Nm
.Op Fl V
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility renames files to make them easier to work with under Linux and other
Unix-like operating systems.
It replaces characters that make it hard to type out a filename with dashes and
underscores.
It also provides transcoding-based filters, converting ISO-8859-1 or CP-1252 to
UTF-8.
An additional filter unescapes CGI-escaped filenames.
.Ss Sequences
.Nm
is driven by a configurable series of filters, called a sequence.
Sequences are covered in more detail in
.Xr detoxrc 5
and are discoverable with the
.Fl L
option.
The default sequence will run the
.Ar safe
and
.Ar wipeup
filters.
Other examples of pre-configured sequences are
.Ar iso8859_1
and
.Ar iso8859_1-legacy ,
which both provide transcoding to UTF-8, and then finish with the
.Ar safe
and
.Ar wipeup
filters.
.Ss Options
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl f Pa configfile
Use
.Pa configfile
instead of the default configuration files for loading translation sequences.
No other config file will be parsed.
.It Fl h , -help
Display helpful information.
.It Fl -inline
Run in inline mode.
See
.Xr inline-detox 1
for more details.
.It Fl L
List the currently available sequences.
When paired with
.Fl v
this option shows what filters are used in each sequence and any properties
applied to the filters.
.It Fl n , -dry-run
Doesn't actually change anything.
This implies the
.Fl v
option.
.It Fl r
Recurse into subdirectories.
Any file or directory that starts with a period, such as
.Pa .git/
or
.Pa .cache/ ,
will be ignored during recursion unless specified on the command line.
Also, any file or directory specified in the ignore section of the config file
will be ignored during recursion.
.It Fl s Ar sequence
Use
.Ar sequence
instead of
.Cm default .
.It Fl -special
Works on special files (including links).
Normally
.Nm
ignores these files.
.Nm
will not recurse into symlinks that point at directories.
.It Fl v
Be verbose about which files are being renamed.
.It Fl V
Show the current version of
.Nm .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Pa /etc/detoxrc
The system-wide detoxrc file.
.It Pa ~/.detoxrc
A user's personal detoxrc.
Normally it extends the system-wide
.Pa detoxrc ,
unless
.Fl f
has been specified, in which case, it is ignored.
.It Pa /usr/share/detox/cp1252.tbl
The provided CP-1252 transcoding table.
.It Pa /usr/share/detox/iso8859_1.tbl
The provided ISO-8859-1 transcoding table.
.It Pa /usr/share/detox/safe.tbl
The provided safe character translation table.
.It Pa /usr/share/detox/unicode.tbl
The provided Unicode control character filtering table, used by the UTF-8
filter.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Nm Fl s Ar lower Fl r Fl v Fl n Pa /tmp/new_files
Will run the sequence
.Ar lower
recursively, listing any changes, without changing anything, on the
files of
.Pa /tmp/new_files .
.It Nm Fl f Pa my_detoxrc Fl L Fl v
Will list the sequences within
.Pa my_detoxrc ,
showing their filters and options.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr inline-detox 1 ,
.Xr detox.tbl 5 ,
.Xr detoxrc 5 ,
.Xr ascii 7 ,
.Xr iso_8859-1 7 ,
.Xr unicode 7 ,
.Xr utf-8 7
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
was originally designed to clean up files that I had received from friends
which had been created using other operating systems.
It's trivial to create a filename with spaces, parenthesis, brackets, and
ampersands under some operating systems.
These have special meaning within
.Fx
and Linux, and cause problems when you go to access them.
I created
.Nm
to clean up these files.
.Pp
Version 2.0 stepped back from transliteration out of the box, instead focusing
on ease of use.
Version 3.0 further shifted this, by removing most of the transliteration from
the tables.
The primary motivations for this were user-provided feedback, and the fact that
many modern Unix-like OSs use UTF-8 as their primary character set.
Transliterating from UTF-8 to ASCII in this scenario is lossy and pointless.
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
was written by
.An Doug Harple .
.Sh CAVEATS
If, after the translation of a filename is finished, a file already exists with
that same name,
.Nm
will not rename the file.
